Theresa May has postponed the final vote on her Brexit deal, in a clear admission by the prime minister that she does not believe she can get the unpopular withdrawal agreement through the House of Commons at this time. As sources confirmed the development, the Speaker’s office said May would give an oral statement to the House of Commons on the European Union at 3.30pm. It will be immediately followed by a business statement from the leader of the House of Commons, Andrea Leadsom, implying that she will confirm the procedural details of the postponement of tomorrow’s vote. A vote could take place next week or even be delayed until early January, although this would allow less time for the ensuing Brexit legislation to be passed through parliament before 29 March. The ultimate deadline for the vote is 21 January. News of the delay caused the pound to tumble to its lowest level in 18 months. The prime minister spoke to cabinet colleagues on Monday morning in a hastily arranged conference call, after apparently concluding she could not win over enough of the 100 Tory MPs who said they were against the deal. The postponement so close to the vote is a significant blow to May’s authority, although it will theoretically give her extra time to negotiate with the European Union and to win over hostile Tory MPs. Angry Tory rebels and Labour MPs vowed that they would attempt to force the government to hold a vote. However, a government source says there would be no vote on a business motion to cancel Tuesday’s vote. “We are replacing the business with a new statement but it isn’t a motion and therefore isn’t voteable,” the source said. Children’s minister Nadhim Zahawi said on Twitter that the prime minister had “listened to colleagues” and would now “head to Brussels to push back on the backstop.” But a European commission spokesman insisted that there was no scope for negotiation, saying: “This deal is the best and only deal possible. We will not renegotiate the deal that is on the table right now. That is very clear. “Our position has therefore not changed and as far as we’re concerned the UK is leaving the EU on the 29 March 2019. We are prepared for all scenarios.” That view was echoed by Ireland’s taoiseach Leo Varadkar, who told reporters “it is not possible” to renegotiate the backstop. “The reason we’ve ended up in the solution we have is because of the red lines the UK itself laid down,” he said. While he said he would not object to the issuing of statements clarifying the meaning of the agreement, he cautioned that no clarification could go against what had already been agreed. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: “The government has decided Theresa May’s Brexit deal is so disastrous that it has taken the desperate step of delaying its own vote at the eleventh hour. “We have known for at least two weeks that Theresa May’s worst-of-all-worlds deal was going to be rejected by parliament because it is damaging for Britain.” Steve Baker, one of the leaders of the hard Brexit European Research Group, said postponement was “essentially a defeat” of the Prime Minister’s Brexit deal. Recalling the prime minister’s general election slogan, the rebel MP added: “The terms of the WA [withdrawal agreement] were so bad that they didn’t dare put it to Parliament for a vote. This isn’t the mark of a stable government or a strong plan.” Downing Street and key ministers have repeatedly said the vote would not be delayed, in an attempt to concentrate the minds of MPs. Earlier on Monday morning, Michael Gove categorically stated the vote would go ahead. Asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme if the vote was “definitely, 100%” going to happen, the environment secretary replied: “Yes”. Pressed on the point, he said: “The vote is going ahead.” The prime minister conducted a frantic round of telephone diplomacy over the weekend, speaking to Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, and Mark Rutte, the Dutch prime minister, Number 10 confirmed. She had also spoken to Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, as well Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European commission, and Donald Tusk, the president of the EU council. Insiders said she had spoken to cabinet members to update them on the outcome of the calls, amid intense pressure from hard Brexit Conservative backbenchers to renegotiate the withdrawal agreement to remove the unpopular Northern Ireland backstop. But both May and the EU have previously said there is no prospect to alter a deal that has already been signed off by heads of government on both sides.